Right and rough to you.
I would not. Do we want to put
we could put something in the
chat? Did someone already
dropped something? The chat to
say.
They say come to say, we're
starting live now.
Yep, good point, hold I'll do
that but not the meeting chat
right the channel chat.
The channel chat right?
Pick.
In about 45 people so far.
But I think it's actually
getting pretty close to what we
had this morning, not too far
off and people will migrate
around.
It'll it'll crank up there.
Yeah, it's like the we should
see like yeah, should be a
little more investment.
Our party comes in right at the
hour, so.
And actually let me check real
quick in terms of.
How many of our?
Subject Matter experts are.
Here at this point.
Sides, Jimmy.
Well, teams is not helpful.
I say see more and it says plus
27 more. Alright, thanks.
No, not exactly what it was
going forward, but I kind of
You guess who?
wanted to see who they were, but
that's OK.
All right?
Alright, so I'm not getting on
that. Uhm, welcome back to all
the folks who are joining us so
far. Hopefully you had a
wonderful day today enjoying
some of the live content here,
which is, I think, a pretty
exciting part of the program.
I think probably a lot of you
had an experience. I heard I had
a number of people talking about
this experience of wanting to
see more than one of those
breakout sessions right, and so
you know, reminder it. Those are
all recorded. So for the ones
that you didn't get to to see
later on as you find moments in
your hour of learning slots, or
you know your learning plan,
check out those those items that
you that you missed. I got to go
today to the one on the
developer productivity. Which
was it? It definitely
highlighted that things have
changed with wave.
Since the time that will last,
you really understood what all
it had and that that actually
that honestly like there's a
strong need to kind of keep up
with with how these tools are
evolving so that you can make
the best use of them, but also
had some really fantastic data
on.
The the impact that the users of
these tools experience and also
the the monetary aspect for
Microsoft up the productivity
gains that can be gained on
those so. And that's pretty
pretty interesting area.
OK so this is Q&A. We have a
keeps various people online
right now who can answer
questions. I've looked back at
the that the list today that I
didn't see any questions coming
in here to the main chat during
breakouts, which I think makes
sense because I think everybody
is putting them into their their
own.
Breakout sessions I I did save a
couple of questions from earlier
today that were not necessarily
at the same point as as the
session we're covering that we
can go over so I can share some
of those, and I think there's
also potentially an option that
if.
Uhm, if various breakout teams
had leftover questions that they
could also probably bring those
things back in here as well. So
facilitators who were facilitate
facilitating prior breakout
rooms, or if you were in a
breakout room and you had a
residual question, please feel
free to raise your hand.
Uhm, OK.
So let's see one of the.
OK, let's see.
Going back and Yep, recent raise
hand anytime and if people see
that I'm missing something in
chat or that I'm missing a hand,
it's probably slow and showing
up for me on teams. So please
just probably let me know as
well.
Uhm, I noticed today that there
were a couple of different
people asking for reference and
good references to different
kinds of.
Uhm of counters, right? Like
somebody looking for PERF
counters specifically to, you
know, map to CPU groups and
another person who was really
looking to understand what sort
of memory counters were
available.
So that they could try to
investigate more deeply. So if
if folks had pointers to where
those sorts of things were
documented and people could find
out that availability.
What was available?
In saying, I see you're on the
call is that a question that you
may be able to help with?
I'm sorry I must have missed
that question. Is this about
references?
Sorry this is about so and I can
post it and.
This will be interesting. Can I
post a link to this in the
meeting chat? Maybe that'll make
it easier.
So this is one of them. One
person who is saying, hey, I
just kind of want a rundown of
what all perf counters are
available for me to to try to
investigate things and then
another person and in a
different.
But the meeting chat saying I
want to know what sort of memory
counters are available so that I
can try to investigate things.
So is there some sort of a kind
of definitive listing somewhere?
I'm sorry is this about that
question in particular or is it
just about like performance
stuff in general?
Well, I grouped these two
questions. Let's start with this
one and then and then we can and
I can paste them the other half,
which was the memory one.
K Kernel mode performance
counters.
Yeah, I was trying to find some
like good internal resources for
them, but I was not able to come
up with that. I I, you know I.
I'm not the expert in this area
hold unfortunately. I can guide.
Unlike other related things
around that, but I think these
MSDN pages are good start.
I can ask around too if there's
any more, anything more specific
about what the question was
asking about.
Sure, thank you yeah and I paste
it in here in the in the meeting
chat as well the the kind of
related one which was hey I see
lots of demos on process
Explorer sysinternals, but where
can I find the description of?
You know, those kind of memory
counters and everything so that
I can check out their meeting
and I see Jason posted another
link here.
Looks great, OK?
Yeah, I think I recall that
Niraj describing in one of the
other Q&A is that WPR is a
tool that that if you have not
already at some point in your
time here, you'll you'll likely
use to analyze various issues.
With WPR, there's different ways
to enable.
Uh.
Different performance counters
and then you can see those
events directly in WPR. Some of
the stuff that I provided
earlier or like different ways
of getting at the same data, but
these are these are either
platform or processor registers
that allow us to collect a
little bit more information
about what's going on in the
system.
And then these are just
different tools for.
You know reviewing those those
counters.
By Jason's right. Like that, the
way that you'll likely use this
and and see it is through WPR.
There are also. I'm kind of
limited, somewhat limited.
Thank you.
Runtime usage is like I'm
thinking of a query performance
counter. Could you see?
We we use the high resolution
QPC extensively and multimedia
like the clock and the deadlines
are everything and so we we did
everything in relation to the
high resolution QPC's. And if
you've ever seen a lip sync
problems, so that's because
audio and video clocks got out
of sync, and so that's just a
constant issue. You do, but we
use these.
Taught these these performance
counters to represent time and
deadlines in the parts of the
system that are that are where
that's critical and multimedia
is a deadlock. It's not a real
time system, it's a highly
sensitive deadline kind of
system like you have to get
things to places on time or or
audio and video don't work
properly and we use keep you see
as a cute as a critical part of
that to make sure that our
timing is straight.
Yeah yeah, only see Kristin who
had one of these original
questions is, you know,
reiterating here that
specifically he's trying to
understand the the pressure on
on particular CPU cores. So he
was looking for counters that
might actually.
Provide that sort of
information.
So if there's folks out there
who actually he said, there's
Yeah.
that there was actually response
on the on the thing, but it it
OK.
was not, not not. I don't think
it.
The response was no, not not
sure that that's the thing we
know, or they would have a good
way to do that.
Yeah, well, what I can do is
perhaps give you a name of a
person to follow up with. How's
that?
And that's Matthew Wolman. He's
been on a couple of the Q&A
as previously. He's at the
development lead of our kernel
core team, 'cause I don't know
if performance counters is what
we want to do, or if there's
certain APIs that we have that
are ways for us to report that
information to you. But he's the
person or somebody from his
team. Likely the person that can
provide you with feedback. So
that's Matthew W as an alias.
Matthew Wolman.
Thank you.
And Christine, if you have a a
follow up therapy albreda, type
it in or two. Raise your hand.
OK.
Uh, as well rule we had so some
of these links. Let's say I'm
looking through the links here
that were provided.
Romans counters
I'm curious.
Well, I'm not sure whether these
ones are going to address what
rolls asking about, which I
think was kind of just trying to
get a sense of, but the things
that show up in these
sysinternal tools where can I
actually find a definition for
what their what they're actually
telling me? But that's how I
Yeah, so in in future in future
if I want to know what commits I
read the question.
mean or what working set means
like a man page or something.
Yeah.
It doesn't call it yeah, yeah
well.
Well, hold on a second.
Go ahead.
Bro, I was hearing you really
softly and then and then I heard
somebody else talking but now I
don't hear you at all.
Basically my question was.
If I want to know what the
commit size means on woodworking
sites mean in the future, where
can I find the definition of
these counters like the Linux
has man page or Hill where it
shows.
Discounters
that's what I was told.
So more details on the the
various metrics that show up on
those tools.
I I feel like so. It's been a
while since I've gone through
the windows internals class, but
I do I. I feel like the this
that gather Windows internal
section kind of covered it
briefly and then probably sorry
the system internals section of
Windows internals kind of
covered it briefly and that you
might be able to somebody linked
earlier. The this is internal
site where I think you could
probably again quite find that.
Uhm, but yeah, what Jack is
saying here, right? Like in
terms of.
Uh.
This the these courses are kind
of a summarization right of a
larger a deeper set of content,
so the books might actually be a
good approach.
Hey.
OK, here's one.
Still not seeing hands, letting
of them wrong about that.
Here's one that somebody was
posting during the security
section.
So paste in the link here, which
was kind of around. Hey, there
used to be this old trick to
reset the local admin password.
Which is described in this in
this question.
And did we ever.
Close that hole.
Yeah, I saw that question.
Actually it's an interesting
one. It's it's potentially
possible that secure boot would
fix that.
But I'm not, I'm not certain
have to be changed for security
people because basically what it
is you essentially replace a
binary on the system, so that
might actually. Yeah, it's it's
it's. It's it's unclear if we do
that. If you have BitLocker
enabled, then yes you couldn't.
It couldn't be done because you
have checked to find a way to
decrypt the drive.
And if you look for example at a
crime and Microsoft is around
all of our stuff, it was
BitLocker and it's a dead
machines, etc. BitLocker
enabled, so certainly there it's
not. It's not on really should
because you can't actually
access the binaries to change
something, but generally
physical access to machine. It's
only a matter of time without
encryption that somebody's going
to figure out how to get into
it.
Like I hope someone recently
like my brother-in-law basically
had forgotten his password and I
ended up editing. Basically, I
hope it look up boot from a USB
hookup registry editor, enable
the admin account.
Log in without a password, reset
his password, log out again,
doesn't let him in account, and
then he got back on again. So
there's there's. I mean, there's
physical access is bearable. You
can actually do generally.
You sound handy to have around.
For your family.
OK, so that was the sorry and I
did not seem to record who had
asked to that because I had
actually moved it over from the
meeting so but whoever it is
that did, ask that if you had
follow up questions. So please
raise your hand or put more in
the chat.
I just one follow up for the
previous question. I wasn't I
wasn't at all equipped on the
thing. I'm used fast enough, but
I spoke to the the dev manager
of course internals yesterday
and he's gonna look into making
it easier to get read only
access for everyone. Microsoft
currently you have to basically.
Oh my microphone broke again,
then not party to Chris access
it. My microphone break again.
It cut out.
Is it still broken or is it back
on again?
But
it's back on.
OK good 'cause I lost it
completely in the call. Got a
call back on my phone it while I
was presenting. Well I mean
after presented buddy.
So yeah, so basically he's
looking into seeing if it's
possible to make it easier for
people to get read only access
to this internal source code as
well, which obviously will help
in picking those things out.
One day, OK?
And then this one came up in and
wasn't answered explicitly or in
an earlier session.
Let's bring this thing. I send,
uh, which is around? How does
Hotpatching work? And I saw in
the chat right that there was a
link put in there to OSD Wiki
with a little bit of
information, but if there's
anybody on this, call now. Who
wants to speak to this at A at A
at a high level like?
Then I think that would be
welcome as well.
Yeah, I saw that question. I had
reached out to a couple of the
folks that worked on the
Hotpatch implementation, but I
couldn't get them to to come.
Right now.
So.
You mean the high level? The way
I can try a high level? It's not
gonna do great justice.
The the wiki page that I think
it was Jason provided is is
pretty good, but you know kind
of high level is that you know
we load a a parallel image in
memory.
And there's metadata that
describe all of the the
functions the two bihat patched.
As well as the order that they
should get patched.
And.
Then
the secure kernel implements the
hotpatch.
A functionality so that it can
coordinate with Patch guard,
which is a which is a security
feature that we have in our
systems to make sure that
there's no tampering of kernel
data structures. So the the
secure kernel receives the all
of the information to do the
patches, and is the component
that actually performs the
patches, and one of the things
that it has to do, which I I
find interesting, is that when
you're patching up.
Function it's a effectively a
jump to the new implementation
and then at the end of the
function it's gotta return back
to the original.
And so we always do the
backwards, you know, patch first
before the forward to make sure
that you there's no race
condition of executing the code.
The patch code before you finish
that the back pointer. So it
goes through does all the back
pointers and then it does all
the forward pointers and again
for security reasons and working
with patchguard. This is all
implemented in our secure
kernel.
And then probably another
interesting thing is like where
do we use hotpatching? So we use
this in the Azure host operating
system so you know our OS we we
is the.
Host operating system for, you
know, the Azure public cloud and
all of the VMS that we we host
in Azure and so we use
hotpatching as a way to have
impact lists servicing.
To that host operating system
and we now have a.
An additional project called
Turbine which.
We're working with our servicing
team for bringing this
functionality to Windows Server.
Those are the two use cases, but
the the primary one, which is
what we've been leveraging the
last few years, is for the Azure
host itself.
Right there was a follow up
question here from Cameron. Is
there a general rule for things
that can be hot patched versus
things that cannot?
Uh, there is and I I didn't look
at the wiki page that Jason
shared in detail, but we do have
a wiki page that kind of has the
this summary.
I'm the one thing to highlight
though is that those?
What cannot be hotpatch we try
to decrease overtime because
this is so foundational to the
success of Azure that we need
this to go down.
Conceptually, Hotpatching is
really good for bug level
changes or bug fixes. Rather
not, hopefully not bugs.
And that's mostly because those
changes are more well contained.
You're updating a few functions
rather than many functions.
But we've deployed features
through HOTPATCH as well in
Azure.
Uh, some of the things that used
to be a problem that we've now
solved is global variables, so
it used to be the case that you
could not add a new global
variable with the hot patch
'cause you 'cause you're
referencing.
Memory in the base image, and so
there's no space for a new
global variable. Now we've
instrumented every image with
padding so that we can add new
global variables to that base
image.
One of the things that we
sometimes run into is calling
convention for functions.
Where?
Your top level API's have a
standardized calling convention,
but for internal functions that
perhaps only your module ever
calls sometimes the compiler.
Well, perform optimizations
where it may notice that a
particular parameter is never
used, and so it will just
optimize it out. That's a
problem for hotpatching. 'cause
what if a a later version of of
that binary needs to use that
parameter? So we've we've been.
Work when we.
We can work around that by
trying to be creative and be
more explicit with the.
They're calling conventions of
each function, or sometimes
having two versions of a
function, one where we force the
calling convention of the base
image and then creating a new
version with, you know, the new
desired behavior, so it
sometimes get a little bit more
tricky, but.
Those are the type of things
that an author of a hotpatch
tends to have to work through
when when creating one.
Well, note in terms of the
eligibility Jack did paste in,
there is a section in that link
that not matching which is that
I think.
Here Jack.
that talks about eligibility.
Uh, and then there was an
additional follow-up question
come from Shell in in terms of.
Well when we can't hotpatch
something then how you know how
do we fix it right? Is there
another work around that needs
to be done for the Azure host?
Yes.
Great question.
In some cases it just means that
new feature or functionality
needs to wait until I've.
You know a future OS where we
may take impact to go through an
OS update. So the.
We have a technology which we
call VM Foo which stands for VM
preserving host update where.
Uhm, we pause BMS in memory and
then we do a soft reboot from
the old kernel to the new kernel
while those BMSR paused. And
then we resume the VMS after we
booted into the note new OS. So
we're currently for you know,
contacts. We're we're doing one
of these deployments right now
in Azure, where we're going from
an OS version that we call Rs.
1.86 and we're updating to an OS
that we call Azure Host 2021.
And we're using VM Foo as a way
to do that update. Now the the
challenge with this is that we
have roughly a 32nd downtime
where those beams are paused in
memory. While that may not seem
like a significant amount of
time, that is enough time that
people.
And notice up lip and so we we
do that.
Very sparingly and you know lean
on things like hotpatch. We also
are trying to build out other
impact list update technologies
so.
Our hypervisor team implemented
a feature called hypervisor.
A hot restart where we are able
to service the hypervisor
itself.
Similarly, by like just re
loading a second hypervisor in
memory, initializing it and then
transferring state to it and
that has about a one second
impact.
But
so so yeah, to you know your
question challenge like.
We're going to have multiple
tools in our tool belt will use
whatever one is the least
impactful and.
You know we want to minimize
that impact for her for Azure
customers.
Also call out in terms of the
you know, physical security
discussion we were having
earlier that he had did post in.
Related talk.
So we're interested in that.
Yeah, that's actually my
favorite strike talk I've ever
seen, and so it's highly
recommended.
We don't. We don't worry about
physical access security on the
PC S and servers. You know the
servers are locked in a data
center, so only trusted people
have access and PCs. We've just
kind of given up on that Xbox
their their business model is
based on. You can't hack and
cheat the system 'cause we there
would be no economic value on
Xbox if it was cheap table and
so they have to go through great
lengths to secure physical
access. And even if you can
crack open the box.
And put oscilloscopes on things
like you still can't hack. UM,
the Xbox is fascinating. 'cause
you know, I, I work on the, you
know, the client OS and so I
never worry about physical
access security. They worry
about it constantly, so it's
just interesting to see a
different tack on things.
Up in a little bit more on the
chat here about.
Various mitigating factors for
when we, when we can't do the
hotpatching. That's it for the
set of questions that I had
noted hadn't been answered over
the course of the day.
Anyone else have questions
they'd like to raise their hand
or put into chat?
Uh, for themselves or that they
saw in their breakout rooms.
I think everybody just be it
just be tired.
It's Friday, it's 319. The sun
is kinda out, honestly.
Yeah, I tell another war story,
but nobody wants to hear another
You know?
war story for me. They want to
go home. Or you know, virtually
call home.
Looks like it looks like two
came in here. Cameron asked, are
there any interesting
developments for the future of
Windows?
It's the first one.
Yeah, if I'll try to answer that
one.
And the you know it's.
I'll answer it how I often share
when I'm doing interview loops.
So are you know I'm doing? You
know various recruitment for the
OS team.
You know OS development is one
of these interesting areas where
when you think of computer
science, it's one of the older
you know fields of computer
science and and so question that
I'm often asked is.
No. What kind of innovation are
we doing and and so I, you know
referred to some of the the work
that we've recently done.
You know at mention VM Fu and
HRAS, these update technologies
but a really profound one is
virtualization based security
BBS.
Where?
We are now leveraging the
hypervisor to provide a
effectively a paradigm shift to
the way that software runs on.
You know, uh, on on the system.
You know, over the last week, or
you know, maybe even before this
last week, you you've learned
about the difference between
user mode and and kernel mode
and the separation or the use of
a privileged level of to
separate applications from their
kernel itself.
With VBS, we took that paradigm.
Put the hypervisor at the bottom
of it, and now we have multiple
virtual trust levels. What we
call BTLS where we have user
mode and kernel mode.
And what this is allowed us to
do is start to pull security
code over into that higher
privileged virtual trust level.
And.
You know, provide.
Uh, I fundamental paradigm shift
where even kernel mode is not
trusted or potentially not
trusted, and that that's a game
changer and such a innovative
paradigm shift. You know,
evolving from many decades of
this established user kernel
boundary.
Yeah, I see that Pedro Marks
mentions confidential VM. This
is another really amazing
innovation that we're going
through right now where.
Talked about Azure earlier and
hosting a virtual machines. What
confidential VMS say is that we
don't trust the host itself.
And so we leverage some
innovation in silicon.
As well as changes in our
software stack to now implement
this paradigm shift where the
host is not trusted.
So lots of really great
innovations happening and and.
You know I can't forecast what
the future fully has in store,
but just this recent work that
we've done over the last few
years shows that there's a lot
of innovation still happening
and pretty exciting to see where
it goes in the future.
A little bit up the stack a
little bit, so I'll describe
some things we're doing in WTX
uhm is figuring out how to
responsibly bring in.
AI and machine learning
workloads. Uhm to help users
which is.
Uhm, a complicated area because
it's pretty easy to figure out
features. Oh, learn from what
the user is doing and help them
do XY or Z, But there's quite
often privacy implications of
almost any workload that you do
there, so it's a very tricky
area to figure out how to do
something useful that respects
the users privacy. So a lot of
when you look at shorter and
longer term.
Planning bambos a lot of the
themes have to do with AI and
machine learning and how we can
responsibly integrate that and
one other detail that's just
kind of a little bit of insight
baseball. If you ever typed in
Word and it starts predicting
the words, you're going to say
you're going to type and then
allows you to autocomplete
without fully typing the word.
We call that augmentation loop.
And uhm, that is a cloud based
interaction. And so the the
model. The AI model for this is
in the cloud and so office app
will actually hit the cloud. Now
if you think about it, we gotta
have a huge subscription
business for this. And so the
users kind of paid for the cost
of goods or the COGS on that.
But we won't want to bring in
the augmentation loop into the
editor on Windows we don't have
the same.
Level up subscription. Paying
for those COGS and so we'd
actually don't want to run that.
That model in the cloud, and so
we want to run that. Bring that
down locally, but when you bring
it down locally, they increase
the size of Windows, which has
its own costs, so there's just a
lot of work that needs to be
done there in order to both
responsibly put this into the OS
and also to do it in a way that
makes economic sense for both
the customer and us.
So I'd say that's another big
area of investment in the in
future windows.
So that ablade put something in
the chat. He's not on the call
right now, but he must have
known that what we were talking
about he shared.
Well, unwinding a little bit the
last two years we've
participated in active exercise
that we call the TLR P so the
technical long range plan.
Where?
We were.
*** bombing yeah where we're
we're trying to articulate, you
know the the three to five year
plan. Hey there he is.
Your ears must be hurting.
Uh, so where we try to
articulate the the plan for the
the middle range? The three to
five years out and and a lot of
that is.
Looking at the the future what's
happening in the industry,
what's happening in silicon and
identifying the investments that
either we are or should be
making across the team.
And so those are the two
documents that he shared there.
Now, if you have anything to add
to that, I will add it now that
you joined us.
No shirt, no. I've been here.
Oh my teams is acting up then.
Yeah he was. He was turning on
the camera 'cause I was dissing
him in the chat and he's like
no, no I'm I'm not. I'm not
Yeah, I was like.
bombing, I'm here so he was.
Here I'm here.
Ha ha.
Uh, sure, uh, no. I mean, I
think it's a great question.
In and I think the in the past
couple of years in particular,
we've tried to put, you know, a
lot more focus on thinking
beyond the current release.
You know and and projecting
forward to to see, you know,
given the.
Given the pace at which
technology moves and given you
know the kind of long term
efforts that some of the
competition you know is, is is
pursuing, you know where do we
think we need? It's a land you
know in like a three to five
year time frame you know. And
what does that imply for what we
should be doing? Great now. And
so the technical langrange
planner for you know, is that's
really. It's motivation, you
know. And it's been super
helpful. You know both for like
you know, maybe pulling their
heads up, you know and.
Elevating the importance of
things that maybe you were kind
of in your shoving their long
you know with less with less
urgency, you know as well as
highlighting that maybe some of
the things that we're doing that
are not as differentiated, and
that maybe we could do lesson to
make more of an impact on the
things that are more back then.
So I'm feel free to take a look.
I mean, I think it's intended to
be a collaborative effort, you
know, the docs are available. We
have not perhaps done as good a
job.
As we could, you know, in
bringing the entire team you
know along you know, and
together you know. I think it's
more of a communications
challenge than anything, but you
know, as you you know, dig into
into the code base and now and
into the architecture. You know
this vehicle is there, you know
for us too.
But I think together about where
we want to go. You know I've
already gotten 2 feature
requests you know out of Salah
and Dylan, you know from our
security isolation.
A deep dive, you know breakdown,
you know and so so so make make
use of these tools.
I think I've figured out how to
do one of them already.
Awesome, see asking you shall
receive.
Pedro, would you be willing to
tell us about the best
innovation of the century?
It's a I'm I'm a very modest
person so I would never consider
something that I wrote as the
best innovation of the century.
But I think it's pretty dope.
Uhm, so in the past when we're
dealing with emulation
everything.
The principles are very always
very similar. You run, you have
an emulator and everything
inside the emulator is a maginus
architecture, so I don't know if
you are if you are running Q
emulator, everything inside of
the accumulator is the
architecture that you're
emulating. There's no
interchange.
You can be interchanging with
the host emulator by the
hardware in layer or if you have
a name later like while 64 your
your interfaces at the syscall
layer, but all of your user mode
is the same architecture.
Uhm?
We kind of broke all the all
these ancient rules of emulation
with ARM 64 AC, but I'll by
allowing not only to mix and
match DLLS of different
architectures loaded in the same
process, but you can actually
statically link functions of
different architectures into the
same binary.
So I thought it was cool.
It's a.
He's like you, you come, you
take a piece of of C code and
you compile it for X64. You take
a piece of arm C of C code and
you compile it for ARM 64. You
feed both into link and you
don't get an error. You actually
get a binary that runs so.
I thought it was cool.
Thank you.
OK, so before we we finish up on
this topics, this is a pretty
broad topic. Anybody else have
anything they wanna throw out
there as?
Exciting upcoming
OK, maybe that was the requisite
get off mute, pause. You never,
you never know.
Uhm?
Great thank you for that link as
well.
OK, so other question was, hey
light and fluffy. That's nice.
Uhm yeah, strategies for
navigating the windows codebase
so mentioned so far right by the
Oscar was research and find, but
also in response to that people
talking here about the areas and
ownerships, portions, a video
and yeah, solid.
So the the in terms of like
navigating. I don't know
precisely what the ASK is, but
I've often found if I'm trying
to understand something. I'm
just connected debugger and see
what it does.
So in that way you would think
you could set to the code and
see what it's actually up to and
and take like real things that
we I mean. For example, I debug
through many parts of the code
along before works in the kernel
team, and when I worked there
was like OK. I'm already
familiar with this. 'cause you
know, if I had there are some
way. I don't just select sort of
mail the kernel team, it's
except for that I remembered
that plugs hey, what's going on?
Uh, beyond debug all the way
through the path and see what's
actually going to understand it
and then figure it out from
there. So sometimes it's also
very useful as well.
Yeah, if the if the question is
just like hey where is the
source code for feature X like 1
trick that I use is to write a
program that uses feature X step
step in see what DLL you landed
in.
Uhm, and then you can ask the
debugger for line numbers and
it'll give you a full file path
and it's like whoo now I know
where the code is.
Yes, we want to.
Send yes, a strong a strong
thumbs up for have multiple tabs
in research, that's great.
Yeah, I think solid so.
Yeah, give a big thumbs up for
that.
Open dash, a trick that under
Raj posted. I love that one.
If you're if you're talking
about like searching through
code and finding the teams that
owned the code and whatnot, if
you actually find the code in
Ado, ADO can search code.
Not as proficiently as research,
but almost there, but definitely
can search for definition of
functions. And then there's a
tab for owners.
Uh, so that is that is pretty
good. Also if you search on
research, you can open a a side
band on the right side that it
show use the all of the changes
that went into that file.
You can learn a lot. I mean, I
find that.
Looking at the code and
understanding why it's doing
what it's doing only tells you
so far as sometimes 50% of why
things are that way. The other
50% is history.
You learn a lot just by knowing
how things you know evolved to,
how they are, and sometimes
looking at the the changes and
how it was in Windows 7 and how
it was in Windows Server 2003.
It's it's can teach you a lot
about a component, specially if
you're taking on any ownership
click component.
One of the pitfalls of.
Using 80 or research to like
find the definition of a
function is that often a
function.
You'll you'll find that like,
oh, they're like 25 copies of
this function. There's like the
Windows desktop version. There's
the Xbox version. There's a W
cast version. There's MFC
version and and so you do have
to be careful sometimes you're
like, oh, give me the definition
of format message and they're
like 80 hits.
You know, like I'll never find
it now.
Also watch out for the A&W
suffixes.
Put in a link as well in terms
of expanding out on the finding
feature owners for when it's
not. When you're not starting
from that, I know exactly where
this code is.
And also you know if if if folks
have additional tips there
right? Please feel free to
document them this. This came
from, you know, new hires asking
how am I supposed to identify?
Who who knows about this thing,
right so?
And try to stay away from fights
trickle. It'll probably be in
all the files locally.
I have done it 'cause it
basically it's setting in GPO,
Yes, Sir.
GVFS. Right so it's kind of
sitting in a virtual copy and
until you actually start
accessing and are generally just
stays over there. So I've
actually sometimes ended up with
a whole bunch of files that I
didn't realize this code path
pointing down.
But Pfeister is also useful too.
Yeah, fine fine staring through
3,000,000 files will take a long
And.
time and burn a lot of
bandwidth.
Yeah, but if you ever
accidentally or purposefully
hydrate based on, uh, feinster,
you actually can UN hydrate the
the repo back into virtual
thousand GPS. There's there's
information on West two wiki how
to do that. If you've ever
gotten too many files actually
on disk in your re bumps.
You just have to notice and
remember to go.
I'll do it.
Jeff, you have a a follow up
question here. AVL Petland of
SDPR.
Uh, I'm confused by your
question. Do you want to
Remember that I was just when I
was trying. I mean, it's you
elaborate? Is this not lame?
know I'm I'm only gonna know old
school references given my
familiarity with code in recent
years, if not decades.
Uh, STPR was for any given file
it listed the file out and then
put all of the the personal
touch. The last touch of the
file. I mean, it sounds like
we're close to that with.
Yeah, no it dude dude hit the
blame tab.
Yeah, so it's so much better
now.
OK.
OK, great.
You don't need a separate tool.
Yeah, just just go to the blame
tab and it's right in front of
you.
Problem with the blame in the OS
repo is that we sometimes, well,
we've switched, switched from
the OS to the OS 2020 repo.
Before that we came from us
from.
A source steco and watch lot.
And get blaming 80 old blame
cannot go as far back as the
last refactor, but research is
able to stitch the history all
the way to the beginning of
source depot. Unfortunately
doesn't get to slime.
But you can go all the way to
source depot, which is pretty
neat. The disadvantage is that
it does not show you the lines.
Like you know the blame tab on
on 80 is amazing because you can
actually see you know from this
line to this line. It was this
person and it was this PR. While
the research just gives you a
list of all the the changes that
went into that file as a whole.
But at least it goes, you know
it transverses all mechanisms of
source management that Microsoft
ever used in the last. You know
three decades or so. So that's
nice.
Picture here's a tip. Highlight
some lines of code and then say
history of selection.
On research
Yeah.
nice so you can actually filter
by lines. Oh, this is amazing. I
will see I learned something
today.
I actually didn't know research
would go back that far, and I
remember when we first migrated
that there was a different tool
that would adapt so that you
could like try to do a single
search and go back.
Oh, and I I know I used to use
the tool before we had blame,
but I now it's been so long
apparently I don't remember was
it SCPR I just don't remember.
I have thrown out all of my
memory of all of these various
tools.
Yeah, well.
One tool to rule them all will
be the the best innovation of
the century.
Now what happens is we we make
we centralized everything into
one tool and then the tool goes
offline.
Running on somebody step box
and.
Yes.
And they went on vacation,
sorry.
OK, other questions here or
follow-ups.
Came here, Jeff is since the
time for your pitch for feedback
on the course. Now they're at
Friday afternoon at 3:40.
Sure we can. We can make that
pitch. It is that now what I had
wanted to do. So this will be
add this to the next time around
because I wanted to put a survey
out, but I I didn't get one
together. But hey, we got the
rest of the stuff together. So
celebrate progress those short
of perfection. But there is the
training feedback channel. I
definitely would encourage folks
to use that. We're going to use
that to kick off a
retrospective. We're still,
we'll put together the exact
details around it, but obviously
whoever is involved, whoever
wants to be involved in helping
us.
Learn from this and improve it.
There'll be an opportunity to do
that.
Uhm?
I feel like there was one other
thing I wanted to cover on this
uhm. I guess if there is like
you know, if you want to give me
feedback that I can a
centralized and anonymize you
can send me email directly and
I'll consolidate that up. It's
like if you don't want to put it
on the teams channel. That's my
point.
I'm happy to take it that way as
well. Constructive feedback,
good feedback. We want it all.
This is I know I said at the
beginning. I'll reinforce it
here that that that this is the
sustainable way that we're going
to stay up to date with the
moving technology. You know
there is.
We have relied so much on tribal
knowledge and This Is Us trying
to break free of that capture as
much as we can, knowing it's
never going to be perfect, but
keep iterating on it so you know
you're part of a living
education process of continuing
education that.
Us getting you more ramped up on
it eventually. You're gonna find
yourself sitting in as the SMEs
for one of these going forward
and it's, you know, it's the
students becoming the teachers
the sustainable way to do this
is that it is us learning from
this group and then teaching
this group.
So I appreciate you all for
being willing to be part of
this, and obviously to the SMB
and the facilitators. I
appreciate the time in helping
to spread that education.
Jamie Abolaji anything you want
to add Fabians on anything you
want to add.
You said it well.
Thank you.
And since the the fun stories,
the anecdotes always went over
well, is there?
One awesome anecdote to leave
this group with.
Here's a question, and in the
chat is Windows 10 internals a
follow up course to this? I
actually didn't know that
existed.
Yeah, that could be one. I mean
we discussed we discovered there
You on the floor.
was some duplicative content in
some newer versions, so that
that's certainly going to be one
thing that we we look at. We
built this curriculum a little
over a year ago. I think they've
since then. There were updates
that have been out there that we
need to look at.
I think Jamie you're gonna say
something there.
Yeah, yeah so.
The plural on Pluralsight.
There's a a lot of videos, so
there's the windows internals
and Windows 10 videos which are
just two of many. Many like
definitely everybody. Take a
look at Pluralsight, a lot of
great content there.
As Jeff was saying, like last
year, when we did the first
instance of our in-house Windows
internal training, we were
leveraging content that was
available on Pluralsight, the
Windows internals.
Content was a.
Much more expensive than the
Windows 10 content, Windows 10
was a like a a shorter bridge.
Follow up on Windows internals.
And so when we you know selected
the various videos to use, we
largely use the.
The video is from the original
Windows internals course because
it went in through more depth.
There was maybe one or two
videos total from the Windows 10
section where we viewed that
those were completely.
Replacing the Windows internal
content.
Jeff, you want me to go ahead
and link the feedback options on
the.
In the channel.
Yeah, you're talking bout the
the channel feedback channel
Yep, but the general channel
distance that there are people
sharp.
or have been going if other
people are like me and they've
Yep.
pinned the general channel so it
teams makes it super hard for to
go to the generic team from
there for some reason.
Oh, unless somebody has a tip on
how teams doesn't make it hard
for them.
Re open to teams tips.
Uhm, yeah.
He
OS deep dive on.
I'm 64 X OK.
I realized after post having
posted that that folks might not
actually have access, so we
might need to download it,
republish it so that folks
actually have access. It's not
in the.
Plug so we have an OS deep dive
series. You know where we where.
We have seen a subject matter
experts you know a come in. Do
deep dives on you know various
topics in their top of mine, but
one of those you know was Pedro.
Did an ARM 64 X, you know at the
time you know we record all of
those you know we have somewhere
which I will find.
A page that lists them all, and
so that's another resource.
The you know folks might find
useful.
For questioning.
When I dropped into chat in case
people weren't aware of this
this team, we it intentionally
made. This team is a public
team. It's it's accessible to
everybody in the company of this
curriculum. The syllabus that we
have here and all the Q&A S
are all added to that syllabus.
Send that out to whoever you
want. We I've already seen
people in my building that have
been passing it around do that.
I mean, it's that's the beauty
of what we've built here is this
is not tribal, this was
persisted. They can even see the
Q&A. They can access the the
chats.
Uh, and and do independent study
version of this. So definitely
pass that around.
So if anybody else had any
questions that popped up while
Jeff was going on and off now
I'm sorry.
Droning on
I I do wanna get let's say it's
not. I mean we still have time.
So if people have questions we
can.
100% still take them.
and one thing, if you well
there's a few little cool things
that happened here. I want to
highlight to make sure people
caught it because it's
important. First of all, E how
he invented something new here
because he's self emoji did he?
Was he reacted as he was
talking? He put his surprise
face up 'cause he was trying to
turn off his hands up, but he
actually did. But that's cool. I
don't. I've never seen someone
self react and I think it's a I.
I was paying attention to what
he was saying but then all of a
sudden I became much more
interested. So that's a a
clever, clever technique. Ehow.
I'm not sure if I could even
pull that off knowing what you
did. I don't like. I can't talk
and operate a UI, that's what
Like
that's why. I have these, but
they're much easier for me.
team?
Yeah, OK.
Clicking on the wrong part I I
actually have an anecdote. It's
Like it?
not the the the most awesome
anecdote of this entry, but uhm,
so I I started working Visual
Studio and then I went to what
was then Digital Media division
which was separate.
Uhm Enventually Multimedia
became part of windows and dumb
I I ended up working on the
audio stack as we were lifting
it out of kernel mode into user
mode so I had a big part in
writing the audio engine in
Windows and the way audio works
is it takes a little bit of a
sample of a sound we call a wave
and PCM.
Uhm, and we deliver that to the
engine that processes and in
various ways and then sends it
to the driver.
Every 10 milliseconds uhm. And
so this this thing actually
wakes up.
Come on a timer every 10
milliseconds and process it.
Yes, thank you. I'm Pedro.
Uhm and so. And this runs on all
the Windows machines, and so I'm
fond of telling people that
software that I wrote runs.
At least billions of times a
day. And so I really, you know,
really.
I've been really grateful for
the opportunity you know to work
on something that has this much
impact on life, so I just really
just really, really enjoyed
being on iOS developer because
it just has so much impact on
people's lives. And it was the
one thing I worked on in my
career. Well, that could explain
to people who weren't, you know,
computer people, what it is that
I actually did at Microsoft and
it was the one and only time I
can explain what I did at
Microsoft to lay people. So
anyway, that's my anecdote.
Thank you for not here, that's
awesome. The other thing I
wanted that was less comical
about things to pay attention to
happening here. Eho still
appreciate the emoji thing was
the fact that.
Uh, the questions that were
being asked here. If you notice
they didn't all come from just
the participants. The subject
matter experts are saying, oh
oh, I didn't know that. I mean,
I just just in the last 30
minutes the different things
said it was. I didn't know that
I didn't know that this is a
very complex space, as evidenced
by people who have been in this
code, for, you know, decades at
in. In some cases that that
don't know. And so the that
should reinforce for those who
all like we we kind of have this
natural tendency to.
I I don't want to ask the
question, you know I I asked the
question we like we all benefit
from it, you know. So there's a
in in our team. I'll drop one
more chat here which is in our
team. We say ask questions until
we tell you to stop and the
punchline of that is we won't
tell you to stop. It's the you
know, it's the we are learning.
We are here to help other people
grow and you'll be in the
position later on where you're
going to be doing the same
thing. So you we want to hear
the questions seek out, you
know, use this training, but
then ask the questions that the
training doesn't answer for you.
Yeah, I I just wanted to say
that later can mean right now
Bill.
Yep.
also.
'cause I'm sure there's there's
a ton of stuff that you already
know. You know that you could
just put in a wiki page, you
know, and someone will be
grateful enough for having seen
it written down. And a lot of
work. The resources that you
know that we're drawing upon
here came from that. It came
from someone taking, you know.
But their knowledge, you know,
making it available more broadly
so our our our other mantras,
leaders, teaching, doing so, you
know, like simply knowing
something that that person
behind it doesn't know makes you
at leader issued teach it.
Right?
Friday afternoon and it is not
raining.
We call it a week.
And and for those who as soon as
we leave the call, we're like,
Yeah.
oh, I was about to raise my
hand. But the channel is still
there. You can. You can continue
asking questions.
Yeah.
All of these subject matter
experts don't disappear. This is
building your network.
All participants can go outside
and enjoy the beautiful weekend
but subject matter experts. Stay
here, sorry.
Yeah.
No.
Even more to the point, all of
the participants know our names
now, so you're free to don't.
Don't don't hit me on chat, I'll
never see it. You can send me
email though.
Yeah, I'll give classes on the
managing your your inbox and
managing teams that that's my
department, so.
Alright, thank you folks.
All right, take care everybody.
Thanks everyone, have a great
weekend.
How about?
Thanks.